so there you are standing on the
observation deck near a massive
waterfall
the wind ruffling your hair the roaring
water blocking out all sounds
and one thought enters your mind what
would happen if i
fell in would it be like diving only
with some extra time to do backflips
along the way
well no need to imagine it's happened
before
one of the most shocking incidents was
at niagara falls
the largest of its kind in north america
it's actually made up of three separate
ones
the biggest being horseshoe falls the
colossal u-shaped cascade is 167 feet
tall
it's like standing on the 15th floor of
a skyscraper
high enough to make you a little dizzy
but it's relatively short for a
waterfall
the world's tallest ones can be from 10
to even 20 times that height
but that doesn't make it any safer to
fall into niagara has some of the
fastest waterfalls in the world
6 million cubic feet of water enough to
fill 70 olympic sized swimming pools
rushing down every minute and if you're
at the bottom
that's seven times the weight of the
statue of liberty falling on your head
yet people have survived that it was on
a saturday afternoon in 1960
a teen and her younger brother went on a
boat trip in the upper niagara river
in the middle of their voyage the boat
got caught in a fast current
and hit an underwater ridge it capsized
and the siblings were thrown into the
rapids the boy
who was only wearing his swimsuit and a
life jacket went over
horseshoe falls his sister was still in
the river
but only seven yards from the edge she
was rapidly being swept toward it
many people were standing at the brink
of the falls witnessing all of this
but nobody knew how to help that's when
two men
rushed to the rail and climbed over it
one of them stretched out his arm
and the girl managed to grab his thumb
right before going over the edge
the other man grabbed them and helped
pull her out of the water
once on dry land the girl shaken and
terrified
asked what happened to her brother the
look on the men's faces said it all
the boy plummeted to the bottom of the
falls and disappeared into the mist
cruising over to the scene the captain
of the mate of the mist
tour boat spotted a bright orange life
jacket in the water
they approached the boy and the crew
pulled him out
alive and conscious the girl walked away
with a cut hand
and her brother had a slight concussion
thirty years later
that boy now a man of course came back
to niagara falls
and described what it felt like falling
over them
he said being thrown against the water
and rocks felt like getting a heavy
beating from all sides
i'll bet this incident was dubbed the
niagara miracle
it was the first time someone survived
the fall being totally
unprotected before that in 1901
a woman went down the waterfall in a
barrel to perform a stunt
she survived as well but swore she'd
never do it again
even for a million bucks experts agree
that a person
must be incredibly lucky to survive such
a fall
don't imagine it like a fun water pox
slide there are dangers the whole way
down
so let's take a hypothetical tumble
together
first you'll experience free fall
accumulating speed with
every second even if you drop from a
relatively short waterfall like niagara
you'll reach highway speeds within three
seconds but what if it's say
angel falls in venezuela it's the
world's tallest
uninterrupted waterfall at a height of
feet taller than the empire state
building the eiffel tower
big bend the statue of liberty and the
leaning tower of pisa combined
the free fall from there would last
about 20 seconds and you'd reach a speed
of 120 miles an hour
along the way you could encounter jagged
rock ledges
but even without those the beating from
the water alone would be
no joke ever stuck your hand out the
window of a moving car on a rainy day
water plus high speeds equals not good
and those were teeny tiny ring drops not
millions of gallons
so gravity is zooming you down to the
bottom you're taking a beating from
massive amounts of h2o
when you finally get to the only exit
available that'll take mere seconds
so forget about doing any acrobatics
you'd plunge under the water
and deep too because of that speed
better hope the body of water below is
also deep
otherwise you risk crashing into
underwater rocks
down here the sunlight gets blocked so
everything around is
black you can't see a thing that
and since you're being pulled and pushed
by so much water
you get totally disoriented you can't
tell which way is up
so good luck knowing which way to swim
out of this thing
your best chances are that you'll
somehow float to the surface
and you do you burst from the surface
and take in a deep breath of fresh air
but you're not out of the woods yet if
you got injured from the water's beating
or a crash with a rock you'll likely
have some injuries
but you still need to swim away from the
falls which of course gets much harder
if you can barely move your arms or legs
the water's temperature can also make
that impossible
sudden entry into extremely cold water
has been known to stop people's hearts
you can't just chill there pardon the
pun until you feel better
you'll have only 15 minutes to get out
of the freezing cold water
up to 30 if it's 40 degrees or warmer
before you lose consciousness from the
cold
but they say that in critical situations
people can move cars right
even with broken ribs or a dislocated
shoulder you make one last attempt
and finally manage to get out of there
you're safe
until you can get to a doctor but we'll
assume there were witnesses who
already called for help if by some
unlucky chance
you ever find yourself in this situation
survival experts do have some tips when
it comes to tumbling over a waterfall
if you're about to go over and there's
nothing you can do to stop it
try to jump from the edge it could help
you avoid rocks below the falls
you'll also gain some distance from the
rushing water early on
so you won't be right under it getting
pounded from above
take a deep breath before going over
this will help you float up later
fall feet first you'll be less likely to
hit your head on something below
don't flail your limbs tighten your
muscles wrap your arms around your head
and put your nose in the crook of your
elbow protecting your head
is key as you approach the water close
your eyes tightly and press your legs
together with all your mind
getting all this immediately swim
downstream
even before breaking the surface you'll
want to get away from the falls as fast
and as far as possible
they'll try to pull you in and keep you
under remember all that
good and i hope you never need to use
this